---
title: Give Jade a Try
date: 2016-09-12 00:00:00 Z
categories:
- Technology
layout: post
summary: We'd love to hear what you think about our new data analysis platform.
author: Niall Robinson
project: jade
thumbnail: https://images.informaticslab.co.uk/jade-gem.jpg
header: 
---

Prologue: This blog post is aimed at Met Office staff, however, if you're not from the Met Office, and want to try Jade, then please get in contact with us.

We're working on prototype that we hope will let people work with huge data sets in a way that's user friendly but powerful. You can find out more at the [project page](http://www.informaticslab.co.uk/projects/jade.html). It would be great to get some feedback on the 

## How to get an account
1. Head on over to [http://jupyter.informaticslab.co.uk/](https://jupyter.informaticslab.co.uk/).
2. You'll be asked to sign in with at Github account. If you don't have an account click on "Create an account"
3. Email your account name to [hello@informaticslab.co.uk](mailto:hello@informaticslab.co.uk), so we can add you to the list of approved users
4. When we reply telling you that you have access, return to [http://jupyter.informaticslab.co.uk/](https://jupyter.informaticslab.co.uk/) and log in with your credentials.

## What you can do

#### Examples
You should find some notebooks for you to play with in the `Examples Notebooks` folder, which will run through the basics of plotting and creating interactive notebooks. We should be updating these in the future.

#### Your home directory
You home directory is special: anything you put there will be saved until next time you log in. So any notebooks you make should probably go there. Also, you can install any software you need (you can run bash commands by starting a line with `!` in a notebook). If you install this to your home directory it will be there next time you log in.

#### Data
We have a bunch of data available for you in the Jade data catalogue. Soon, we'll make it available in the `Data` directory. If you want to download your own data, it would be great if you could store it somewhere that isn't your home directory e.g. `/data/`. This means we wont have to pay to store it till next time you log in. However, it also means that you'll need to download it again next time.

If there is a dataset you want to use regularly then let us know and we can put it in the Jade data catalogue.

## Let us know what you think!
We wanted to get you involved at the very early stages of the project, so some things might not work as expected, might break, or you might want something which doesn't exist yet. If so, get in contact (preferably in person - just come and knock). 

We'll constantly be updating Jade over the next few months so let us know what features you'd like. We really need your help to make this something which is useful to you.