---
title: Lab principals
date: 2017-07-21 00:00:00 Z
categories:
- lab
layout: post
summary: We have built up our own culture in the lab. These principals encapsulate that culture.
author: Jacob Tomlinson and Niall Robinson
project:
thumbnail: 
header: 
---

Over the last couple of years we have built up our own culture in the lab. Recently we have been talking about a set of principals that would help newcomers and outsiders get up to speed with our culture quickly.

## 1. Don't take the piss

This is the primary rule of the lab. It is also a powerful rule in encouraging autonomy in members of the Lab. Ever feel like you should ask permission to do something? Just simply ask yourself if you think it takes the piss, if it doesn't then just do it and stop wasting time!

## 2. See rule 1

Rule 1 is so important that it deserves a second place on the list. It removes bottlenecks and waiting on higher ups to approve something. You only need to ask if you worry that it might take the piss, otherwise you can just get on with stuff.

## 3. Ask forgiveness not permission

Taken from the [Python Glossary](https://docs.python.org/2/glossary.html) term [EAFP](https://docs.python.org/2/glossary.html#term-eafp). This is another principal which empowers autonomous thinking and removes blockers. If it's not obvious how to go about doing something in an 'official' or 'correct' manner then it's best to go ahead and do it anyway, provided it doesn't break rule 1. If it turns out that it was the wrong thing to do or that you should've followed some specific process then you should simply ask for forgiveness, but this is often a rare occurrence.

## 4. To live a creative life, we must lose our fear of being wrong

Make mistakes, but do not repeat them. We do not learn without making mistakes, successes only come after a series of failures. Making mistakes shouldn't be punished, otherwise people become over cautious and do not take risks for fear of repercussion. The lab fosters a safe space to learn, experiment and fail. However making the same mistakes over and over becomes wasteful and should be avoided.

## 5. If there is no Trello card it isn't happening

We plan our upcoming work using Trello. For each project the lab is working on we create a high level Trello card describing it. If you find yourself doing some work and there isn't an associated Trello card then you probably shouldn't be doing it.

## 6. If there is no blog post it didn't happen

We record our progress using blog posts on our website. As we have no requirement to create products or release software we need a way to mark milestones and demonstrate that we are actually doing useful things. Having blog posts to refer back to allows us to take credit for informing a piece of work when others implement operational projects based on innovations we've had.

## 7. Make things

Simply talking about things isn't enough. Ideas are cheap and important people get sick of hearing them. As soon as possible you should make a proof of concept, prototype, mvp, whatever you want to call it. But make a thing that you can show people, seeing is believing.

## 8. No bean bags

Innovation is often a dirty word for a space filled with bean bags and ping pong tables that people use to talk about doing things. This is bad innovation culture, see rule 7.

## 9. Premature optimization is the root of all evil

This old computer adage applies to more than just code. When building something the first thing you should do is make it work, even if it doesn't satisfy all (or even any) or the requirements. You should create something simple and then iterate on it to make it better, but always leaving it in a working and usable state.
