---
author:     Informatics Lab
layout:     year-one
title:      "Year one in the Lab"
date:       2016-03-30
permalink:  "/year-one/"
summary:    ""
categories: []
project:    none
thumbnail: ""
---

# Informatics Lab

## A year on...

We continue to produce prototypes quickly by mixing disciplines, sharing knowledge and enabling access to Met Office data.

We test and try new technologies, exploring ways to make our Met Office operational services more robust. This allows us to learn lessons for the organisation and help to develop best practice guidelines.

From one day hacks, week long intense sprints and longer larger projects, we’ve covered a lot in our first year. Here’s five of our most useful projects...

### Project One
In our first larger project we worked to render our forecast data to create new browser visualisations by exploiting advances in technology.

We ran idea generation sessions at MozSpace, tested with the public at the RAAM Exeter and led discussions at MozFest 2015, showcasing 2our demos.

LINK TO VIDEO 1 LINK TO DEMOS
LINK TO BLOG POST: http://www.informaticslab.co.uk/technical/2015/10/05/data-encoding.html
LINK TO PAPER
LINK TO BLOG POST: http://www.informaticslab.co.uk/lab-school/2015/06/24/lab-school-docker.html

#### ￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Did you know?
Our work in compressing big data in the browser, by encoding data as video, is helping to inform better products for our Aviation customers.

We submitted a paper on ‘Cloud Computing’ based on our exploration of software in the cloud, Docker and containers. We have also been peer reviewed in a paper about Interdisciplinary Teams by Aiko Yamashita from Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied Sciences.

#### ￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Did you know?
We’ve been working with our Platforms Team and by introducing Docker we may help to allow an increase in the efficiency of our servers from 25% to 90%.

We’ve been exploring and developing gaming technologies, creating mobile controllers and developing visualisations for virtual reality. We collaborated with Young Rewired State to run a hackathon as part of London Design Week.

#### ￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Did you know?
This work is helping gaming communities to exploit and easily integrate our datasets. We’ve also been exploring syncing data and visualisations via wifi across platforms – potentially helping forecasters explain and share the weather story across various bandwidths.

We’ve been working on a number of side-projects to test and develop our skills and make new connections (and have some fun!)
Interactive art:
- Sandpit
- Rhino
- Lego Mindstorms

#### ￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Did you know?
By also working on these side-projects we’ve developed new connections and continue to support the Met Office as being seen as innovative and creative, helping with Technology recruitment campaigns.

### Project Two
Our second larger project is exploring how people can interact with our data by developing and testing bots and Natural Language Processing systems for decision-making.

Amazon...

#### ￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Did you know?
By working outside of the network we reduce the risk to the organisation and help to feedback learnings to make operational services more robust We can also try things quickly and cheaply at a low risk.

### What’s next?
We will continue to build networks and help to allow organisations to easily exploit our data.
We are helping to organise Graphical Web Conference in November which the Met Office is hosting. More details to be announced soon!
